Sudoku is a popular grid game that we
all played once I think in our lives.
Let's first clearly define the problem
then see how we can solve it with graph
coloring. A sudoku grid usually has a size of 9
by 9, it has 9 rows, 9 columns, and 9 subgrids.
Each cell belongs to one row, one column, and
one subgrid, and can have a value from 1 to 9.
The goal is, given a grid with some pre-filled
cells, to fill it by assigning a number from 1
to 9 to remaining cells. But by respecting this
condition: In each row, column, or subgrid,
each number must be unique, used only once.
Here's an example of a filled sudoku grid,
you can see that no number is repeated
in a same row, column, or subgrid.
In the YouTube channel, we've made a Sudoku
solver by using backtracking, you can go watch
the video. But in this lecture, we're in the graph
coloring chapter so we will use graph coloring.
In graph coloring, we have the word
graph, so we will work on a graph.
While here, we just have a grid,
which is represented by a matrix.
You've guessed it, we have an implicit graph.
In graph coloring, vertices represent elements
we want to color, and an edge between vertices
means that we must not give them the same color.
In the case of Sudoku, we need to think of
what does a color represent in the context,
what elements we want to color, and how to know
if we can give the same color to two vertices.
In Sudoku, a color is simply a value
from 1 to 9, that we can give to a cell.
In a more general way, from 1 to n, where
n is the size of the grid. Because that's
what we do in reality when playing Sudoku, we
attribute values to cells, we kind of color them.
The concept of coloring in this chapter is broad,
a color can be a real color, it can be a value,
a class, anything. And elements we want
to color are the cells of the grid,
so they will be our vertices, we have a graph of
81 vertices, 9 by 9. Last thing, how to know if
two vertices can or cannot have the same color,
in other words, what are the edges of our graph.
In Sudoku, a same value cannot be repeated
in a same row, column, or subgrid, so two
vertices cannot share the same value if they
are in the same row, column, or subgrid. Which
means that there is an edge between two nodes
if they share the same row, column, or subgrid.
It's hard to visualize it with a 9x9 grid,
but we can see it better with a 4x4 grid.
As you can see, there is an edge between
vertices of the same row, column, and subgrid.
For example if we take the cell at
the third row and second column,
we can see that it has an edge with every
other node in its row, column, and subgrid.
Last thing before launching the algorithm,
k, the number of colors. In a 9x9 grid,
each cell can have a value from 1 to 9,
we have 9 "colors". In this 4x4 grid,
each cell can have a value from 1 to
4, we have 4 "colors". In general,
for an n by n Sudoku grid, each cell can have a
value from 1 to n, we have n "colors", k is n.
You can notice that we already
have some pre-colored vertices,
they represent pre-filled cells,
we cannot change their color.
Now we have all the elements to launch our
k-coloring algorithm. We want a coloring that
uses exactly n colors, not more, so we will use
the backtracking algorithm, not the greedy one.
By applying it on this 4x4
grid, this is what happens.
It solved this 4x4 Sudoku grid.
And obviously we can also apply it on grids
of bigger sizes, like the classic 9x9 grid.
To implement this algorithm, we can simply build
the graph and use our k-coloring algorithm. But,
we don't need to build the graph, we just need
to know how are vertices represented, and how to
find the neighbors of a vertex. Additionally, our
k-coloring algorithm was using a list of vertices
with the index of the actual vertex, and every
time it colors a vertex, it moves to the next
vertex, so we also need to have the list of our
vertices, to know how to move to the next one.
Let's begin. Vertices are cells of a matrix, so a
vertex can be represented by its coordinates (r,
c) in the matrix. How to get the neighbors
of a vertex (r, c)? In this context,
neighbors are vertices that needs to have
a different color from the vertex (r,
c), which are, vertices of the row r except
itself, vertices of the column c except itself,
and vertices of the subgrid where
(r, c) is located except itself.
Last thing, what is the list of vertices, and
how to move to the next vertex? First approach,
we can put all vertices in a list by following the
order we get with a left-to-right top-to-bottom
traversal, then it's easy, the actual vertex
is at index i and the next one is at index i+1,
and we know that we finished when i is
equal to the number of elements in the list.
Or, we can directly work with elements of the
grid. But it's a matrix, so a vertex won't be
represented with a single index i, but with two
indices r and c. And to move to the next vertex,
we have two cases: Either we still have elements
in the actual row so we just move to the next
column, c becomes c+1. Or we've reached the
end of the row, in which case, we need to
move to the next row and start again from the
first column, so r becomes r+1 and c becomes 0.
And to know that we traversed all vertices, we
check if we finished all the rows, we check if
r is equal to n, it means we finished all the
rows. Let's implement this in code. We first
need a function to get the neighbors of a cell, in
other words, cells whose color must be different.
As parameters we just need the size of the
grid n, the row r and the column c of the cell.
We create an array neighbors, and now we need
to add cells of its row, column, and subgrid.
For the row, we need all cells whose row is r,
so we traverse the n indexes of columns and we
add the cells (r, i). i must be different
from c to avoid adding the actual cell.
For the column, almost same logic,
we need all cells whose column is c,
so we traverse the n indexes of
rows and we add the cells (i, c).
i must be different from r to avoid adding the
actual cell. But for the subgrid, it's a bit
harder. First we need to know the dimensions
of a subgrid. For a Sudoku grid of size n,
the dimensions of a subgrid are sqrt(n) by
sqrt(n), for example if n is 9 we have 3 by 3.
Now we need to find in what row and column the
subgrid starts, and traverse the next sqrt(n)
indices. For the row, the subgrid of a cell (r,
c) starts at the row floor(r/sqrt(n))*sqrt(n),
it represents how much subgrids there are before
the actual one multiplied by the size to know
exactly how much indices we need to skip. For
column, same logic, we're in a square matrix,
so for the column, the subgrid of a cell (r, c)
starts at the column floor(c/sqrt(n))*sqrt(n).
We now have where the subgrid starts, we traverse
the next sqrt(n) indices starting from there.
So cells of the subgrid of a cell (r, c)
are between row r_start inclusive and row
r_start + sqrt(n) exclusive, and between column
c_start inclusive and c_start + sqrt(n) exclusive.
In code we traverse the couples (i, j) in this
range, they represent cells of the subgrid.
(i, j) must be different from (r,
c) to avoid adding the actual cell.
We found all neighbors, we return them.
Then we need a recursive function that will color
the "graph", remember what we used in k-coloring.
As parameters we need the grid, and indices of the
actual cell. We extract the size of the grid. As
said earlier, we know that we've been able to
color all cells when r is equal to n, so if r
is equal to n, we return true. Else, we try to
color the actual cell and move to the next one.
First we need to know colors used by neighbors,
for that we put colors of neighbors in a set as
you can see. We also need to know the next
cell, the next one is (r, c+1) if there are
remaining columns in the actual row, if c is
smaller than n, else the next cell is (r+1, 0).
Now we have two cases, either the cell is
already filled, already colored, or it's empty.
If it's already colored, if its value different
from 0, then we don't touch it, we directly move
to the next cell by calling recursively and
returning that result. Else, we need to try
the different colors. Possible colors are from
1 to n, possible values we can give to a cell.
For each one of them, we first check if it's not
used. If it's not used, we give it to the actual
cell, and start from the next one. We recursively
call on the next cell, and if it returns a
positive result, then we've been able to solve the
game, we return true to stop touching the grid.
Else, we try with the next color. If all
colors didn't lead to a positive result,
we set back the cell to its original state,
uncolored, 0 as a value, and we return false.
Last thing, in our solve_sudoku function, we call
the recursive function to color the grid starting
from the cell (0, 0), and we return the grid. The
returned grid will be filled with valid values,
if it was possible obviously. And we've been
able to solve Sudoku game with graph coloring.
It's true that it's quite slow, because
our k-coloring algorithm is exponential,
but for a classic Sudoku grid, where the size is
9, it's pretty small, the runtime is acceptable.
We've reached the end of this lecture, I hope
that you understood how we solved Sudoku,
with graph coloring. See you in the next lecture.